_This document is based on a copy of the technical publication "Lexicon of disease spread modelling terms" originally published in Rev. sci. tech. Off. int. Epiz., 2011, 30(2), 547-554. It is provided here for convenient use in the Animal Disease Spread Model program under fair use.  Formatting has been modified to fit the wiki format. ADSM specific entries have been added._

__K. Patyk(1), C. Caraguel(2), C. Kristensen(1)& K. Forde-Folle(1)__  
_(1) United States Department of Agriculture, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, Veterinary Services,
Centers for Epidemiology and Animal Health, 2150 Centre Avenue, Building B, Fort Collins, CO 80526-8117,
United States of America_  
_(2) Canadian Food Inspection Agency, hosted at the Centre for Veterinary Epidemiological Research, Atlantic
Veterinary College, University of Prince Edward Island, 550 University Avenue, Charlottetown, Prince Edward
Island, C1A 5H6 Canada_

## Summary
Over the past decade there has been a notable increase in the magnitude and
variety of modelling work in the realm of animal health. Similarly, there has been
an increase in the extent to which modelling is used as a component in the
development of animal health policy. The increased dependency on modelling
creates a need to enhance understanding and linkages between policy-makers
(those that pose the policy or scientific questions, commission modelling work
and use model outputs in the development of policy), intermediaries (those that
are responsible for working with modellers and communicating model results to
policy-makers), and modellers. Development of a lexicon of disease spread
modelling terms can help support clear communication and collaboration
between all players.


### [Adequate contact](#adequate-contact) 
A contact between individuals that would lead to the
transmission of disease if one individual is infectious and
the other is [susceptible](#susceptible) (9). See also [effective contact](#effective-contact).

### [ADSM](#adsm)  
_Synonyms: Animal Disease Spread Model_  
The current development fork of [NAADSM](#naadsm) being developed through the USDA
as a group effort between the United States and Canada.  ADSM has an updated User
Interface based on web technology and can be used as a server to run many iterations
in parallel.

### [Airborne transmission](#airborne-transmission)
The distribution of microbial aerosols consisting partially
or completely of microorganisms which can be drawn into
lung alveoli. This type of transmission includes
transmission by droplet nuclei and dust (6). See also [direct
transmission](#direct-transmission);
[indirect transmission](#indirect-transmission); [transmission](#transmission).

### [Apparent epidemic curve](#apparent-epidemic-curve)
A graph plotting the number of newly ‘detected’ cases per
unit time (5). The number of ‘detected’ cases may be fewer
than the number of ‘actual’ cases when detection is
imperfect. See also [actual epidemic curve](#actual-epidemic-curve); [epidemic curve](#epidemic-curve).

### [Assumption](#assumption)
Unknown or uncharacterised information used in the
model that is thought to be true. Models are typically based
on assumptions that help simplify aspects of the system
being modelled. It is recommended that all assumptions be
explicitly stated and constantly re-assessed. ‘Hidden
assumptions’ that could possibly impact the model
outcome should also be described. If the assumptions used
are incorrect, then output from the model is suspect (9).

### [AusSpread](#ausspread)
The stochastic, spatial, state transition disease spread
model that has been developed by the Australian Government Department of Agriculture, Fisheries, and
Forestry to support exotic disease preparedness in
Australia (3).

### [Backward trace](#backward-trace) 
_Synonyms: [Trace back](#trace-back), [Trace-in](#trace-in)_  
To track or identify movements of animals, personnel,
vehicles, or equipment (i.e. direct and/or [indirect contact](#indirect-contact)s)
to a detected, infected [premises](#premises) for the purposes of
identifying a potential source of infection (13). See also
[forward trace](#forward-trace); [tracing](#tracing).

### [Basic reproductive number](#basic-reproductive-number)
_Synonyms: Ro_  
The number of secondary cases generated by the
introduction of an infectious individual into a completely
[susceptible](#susceptible) population (8). See also [reproductive number](#reproductive-number).

### [Beta distribution](#beta-distribution)
A [probability density function](#probability-density-function) used to describe the
[uncertainty](#uncertainty) or variation around a probability or
proportion. This distribution is defined by two parameters:
alpha (), and beta () (15). See also [probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [BetaPERT distribution](#betapert-distribution)
A [probability density function](#probability-density-function), derived from the Beta
distribution, used to describe the [uncertainty](#uncertainty) or variability
of any continuous parameter estimate. This distribution is
defined using three parameters: the minimum, maximum,
and most likely (or mode) values. Often, subject matter
experts are consulted to estimate the distribution’s
parameters. Compared to a [triangular distribution](#triangular-distribution), a
[BetaPERT distribution](#betapert-distribution) provides less weight to extreme
values (15). See also [probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [Clinically infectious](#clinically-infectious)
A [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the presence of clinical signs
and shedding of the disease agent (5).

### [Cluster](#cluster)
A spatial and/or temporal concentration or group of
individuals or observations. It is expected that individuals
or observations within a [cluster](#cluster) are more similar than those
among [cluster](#cluster)s (10).

### [Conceptual validity](#conceptual-validity)
See [face validity](#face-validity).

### [Control measures](#control-measures)
A series of actions, efforts, or measures taken to impede the
progression of, reduce the frequency of, or eradicate,
disease in a population. [Control measures](#control-measures) limit the
probability of transmission between [susceptible](#susceptible) and
infectious herds/flocks by either isolation (e.g. movement
restrictions, quarantine) or decrease the production of the
disease agent (e.g. treatment, culling), and/or increase the
resistance of [susceptible](#susceptible) herds/flocks (i.e. vaccination) 
(10, 13). 


### [Deterministic models](#deterministic-models)
A mathematical model in which the model input
parameters are point estimates. This type of model does
not incorporate random variation or [uncertainty](#uncertainty) (13). See
also [stochastic models](#stochastic-models).

### [Direct contact](#direct-contact)
The movement of animals within units ([premises](#premises), section,
pen) or from one unit to another unit with animals (5). See
also [adequate contact](#adequate-contact); [effective contact](#effective-contact);
[indirect contact](#indirect-contact).

### [Direct transmission](#direct-transmission)
The transfer of a disease agent by direct or close contact
(14). See also [airborne transmission](#airborne-transmission);
[indirect transmission](#indirect-transmission);
[transmission](#transmission).

### [Disease progression](#disease-progression)
_Definition needed_

### [Disease spread models](#disease-spread-models)
Models that incorporate epidemiological principles to
simulate the spread of disease within a population.
Epidemiological modelling provides a useful [mean](#mean)s of
simulating disease spread when experiments and field
observations are limited or impractical. Examples of
[disease spread models](#disease-spread-models) include: [AusSpread](#ausspread), InterSpread
Plus, and NAADSM.

### [Disease state](#disease-state)
A series of ordered stages which follow the progression of
an infectious disease. The identification of the different
[disease state](#disease-state)s and the transition through them are
fundamental to state transition modelling. Examples of
various [disease state](#disease-state)s include: 
[latently infected](#latent-state), 
[subclinically infectious](#subclinically-infectious), 
[clinically infectious](#clinically-infectious), 
and [naturally immune](#naturally-immune). 

### [Distribution](#distribution)
A summary of the frequencies of each value or range of
values out of all possible values (6).
from detected, infected [premises](#premises) to other [premises](#premises) for the
purposes of identifying the potential spread of infection
(13). See also [backward trace](#backward-trace); [tracing](#tracing).


### [Immune](#immune) 
_Synonyms: Recovered_  
A [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the absence of clinical signs
and termination of agent shedding. See also [natural immunity](#natural-immunity);
[vaccine immunity](#vaccine-immunity).

### [Incidence](#incidence)
The number of new cases of disease that occur in a
population during a given time period (4).

### [Incubation period](#incubation-period)
An early [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the presence of the
agent in the herd/flock and by the absence of clinical signs.
The state begins with initial exposure to the disease agent
and ends at the first appearance of clinical signs. An
incubating herd or flock may or may not be infectious (6).
See also [latent state](#latent-state).

### [Indirect contact](#indirect-contact)
The movement of people, vehicles, equipment, etc. from
one [premises](#premises) to another [premises](#premises) with animals (5). See
also [adequate contact](#adequate-contact);
[direct contact](#direct-contact); 
[effective contact](#effective-contact).

### [Indirect transmission](#indirect-transmission)
The transfer of disease agent via movement of personnel,
vehicles, equipment, etc. (14). See also [airborne transmission](#airborne-transmission);
[direct transmission](#direct-transmission);
[transmission](#transmission).

### [Infectious state](#infectious-state)
A [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the shedding of disease
agents with or without the presence of clinical signs. See
also clinically infectious; [subclinically infectious](#subclinically-infectious).

### [Input parameter](#input-parameter) 
_Synonyms: Model input, Parameter_  
Values, sometimes in the form of distributions, that are
used in models to represent a component of the processes
or events being modelled. Common examples of animal
disease spread model input parameters include herd and
flock locations, distributions representing the duration of
various [disease state](#disease-state)s, and the number of contacts that
occur between [premises](#premises).

### [InterSpread Plus](#interspread-plus)
A spatially explicit, stochastic simulation used to model
disease among animal populations developed by the

### [Distribution fitting](#distribution-fitting)
A procedure used to select a [theoretical distribution](#theoretical-distribution) which
best describes empirical data within a sample dataset (15).

### [Effective contact](#effective-contact)
A contact between an infectious individual and a
[susceptible](#susceptible) individual that leads to disease transmission
(9). See also [adequate contact](#adequate-contact).

### [Empirical distribution](#empirical-distribution)
A summary of the frequencies of each observed value or
range of observed values within a sample dataset. Data
points are directly applied to define an empirical
distribution. [Empirical distribution](#empirical-distribution)s may be used in
modelling when the available data are not amenable to
fitting of theoretical [probability density function](#probability-density-function)s. See also
[probability density function](#probability-density-function); 
[theoretical distribution](#theoretical-distribution).

### [Epidemic](#epidemic)
The occurrence of disease in a population or region, in
excess of normal expectancy (4).

### [Epidemic curve](#epidemic-curve)
A graph plotting the number of new cases per unit time
(13). See also [actual epidemic curve](#actual-epidemic-curve);
[apparent epidemic curve](#apparent-epidemic-curve).

### [Expert opinion](#expert-opinion)
Information gathered through consultation with
individuals recognised as knowledgeable regarding the
subject at hand, to inform input parameter values for
[disease spread models](#disease-spread-models). [Expert opinion](#expert-opinion) is based on
personal experience, opinion, and [assumption](#assumption)s and is an
important source of information when data are needed but
not readily available through other sources (12).


### [Face validity](#face-validity) 
_Synonyms: Conceptual validity_  
The process of determining if the interrelationships of the
real system are adequately represented by the model and if
the model outcomes make biological sense (11, 7). See also
[validation](#validation).

### [Forward trace](#forward-trace) 
_Synonyms: Trace forward, Trace-out_  
To track or identify the movements of animals, personnel,
vehicles, or equipment (i.e. direct and/or [indirect contact](#indirect-contact)s)
Massey University EpiCentre. Further information is
available at: www.interspreadplus.com.

### [Iteration](#iteration) 
_Synonyms: Realisation, Run_  
The process of achieving results through the successive
repetition of a sequence of steps (1).

### [Latent state](#latent-state) 
A [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the period of time that
elapses between exposure to a disease agent and the onset
of infectiousness (shedding of disease agent) (8). See also
[incubation period](#incubation-period).

### [Mean](#mean)
A measure of central tendency. The average value for a set
of data calculated by summing all of the sample values and
dividing by the total number of samples (13).

### [Median](#median)
A measure of central tendency. The middle value for a set
of observations arranged from lowest to highest such that
half of the observations fall below the value and half of the
observations are above the value (13).

### [Mode](#mode)
A measure of central tendency. The most common value in
a set of observations (6).

### [Model](#model)
A representation of a system or process that is intended to
simulate reality. Models are commonly used to investigate
how the system may respond to different interventions
(12).

### [Model stability](#model-stability)
See [stability](#stability).

### [Monte Carlo simulation](#monte-carlo-simulation)
A simulation model in which input values are sampled
randomly from input distributions for each iteration of the
model (10).

### [NAADSM](#naadsm) 
_Synonyms: North American Animal Disease Spread Model_  
A stochastic, state transition model which incorporates
spatial and temporal information to simulate the spread 
of highly contagious animal diseases. NAADSM provides a
framework for the construction of epidemiological
simulation models. NAADSM is available at:
www.naadsm.org (5).

### [Natural immunity](#natural-immunity)
A [disease state](#disease-state) in which herds/flocks are immune due to
natural progression through the [disease state](#disease-state)s (i.e. previous
exposure to the pathogen) (5, 6). See also [immune](#immune);
[vaccine immune](#vaccine-immune).

### [Parameter](#parameter)
See [input parameter](#input-parameter).

### [Population](#population)
_Definition needed_

### [Prediction interval](#prediction-interval)
The range in which an observation is expected to exist with
a specified probability based upon past observations (2).

### [Premises](#premises)
An area of land and the animals on it. Disease spread is
sometimes modelled between [premises](#premises), herds, flocks or
pens rather than between individual animals, consequently
certain input parameters (e.g. direct and [indirect contact](#indirect-contact)
frequencies and distances) are established to represent
between-[premises](#premises) dynamics.

### [Prevalence](#prevalence)
The proportion of the population that is affected by a
disease or a condition at a specific time (4).

### [Probability density function](#probability-density-function)
A distribution of values for a continuous variable that is
representative of the range of possible values for a disease
spread model input parameter (2, 5).

### [Probability distribution](#probability-distribution)
For a discrete random variable, a function (e.g. Poisson
distribution) that gives the probability of each value of the
variable. For a continuous random variable, a curve (i.e.
[probability density function](#probability-density-function)) used to specify the
probability of a value for the variable falling within the
frequency distribution (6). See also [probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [Probability of infection](#probability-of-infection)
The probability that transmission will occur and will result
in infection, given exposure of a [susceptible](#susceptible) individual to
an infectious source. The [probability of infection](#probability-of-infection) will vary
depending on the disease agent, the host, and the
environment.

### [Production type](#production-type)
_Definition needed_

### [Realisation](#realisation)
See [iteration](#iteration).

### [Recovered](#recovered)
See [immune](#immune).

### [Relative validity](#relative-validity)
The process of comparing the model outcomes of a disease
[scenario](#scenario) applied to several independently developed
models to identify similarities and differences in results (7).
See also [validation](#validation).

### [Reproductive number](#reproductive-number) 
_Synonyms: R_  
The number of secondary cases generated by an existing
case. R=R0(S/N) where S is the number of [susceptible](#susceptible)
individuals and N is the total number of individuals in the
population (8). See also [basic reproductive number](#basic-reproductive-number).

### [Run](#run)
See [iteration](#iteration).

### [Scenario](#scenario)
A collection of input parameters applied to an
epidemiological simulation model to describe a biological
system, event or process.

### [Sensitivity analysis](#sensitivity-analysis)
The process of assessing the influence of uncertain input
parameters or [assumption](#assumption)s on model outcomes (12).

### [SEIR model](#seir-model)
A method for modelling the spread of infectious diseases
which is similar to [SIR model](#sir-model)s but adds an additional
[disease state](#disease-state), exposed (E). Members of the population exist
within one of four [disease state](#disease-state)s: [susceptible](#susceptible) (S), exposed
(E), infectious (I), or recovered (R), corresponding to the
letters of the acronym for which the model is named, and
transition from one [disease state](#disease-state) to the next (8).

### [SIR model](#sir-model)
A method for modelling the spread of infectious diseases.
Members of the population exist within one of three
[disease state](#disease-state)s: [susceptible](#susceptible) (S), infectious (I), or recovered
(R), corresponding to the letters of the acronym for which
the model is named, and transition from one [disease state](#disease-state)
to the next (8, 12).

### [Stability](#stability) 
_Synonyms: Model stability_  
The reliability of a model, i.e. the consistency with which
it is free of errors, especially those affecting model accuracy
and results (7).

### [Stochastic models](#stochastic-models)
A type of model that takes into account the variability and
[uncertainty](#uncertainty) of biological processes by using distributions
as model input parameters. These models produce a range
of possible outcomes and the probability of any particular
outcome (13). See also[deterministic models](#deterministic-models).

### [Subclinically infectious](#subclinically-infectious)
A [disease state](#disease-state) in which there is an absence of clinical signs
but in which disease agent is being shed (5).

### [Susceptible](#susceptible)
A [disease state](#disease-state) characterised by the capacity to become
infected. Individuals in this [disease state](#disease-state) are neither
infected, naturally immune, nor [vaccine immune](#vaccine-immune) (8).

### [Theoretical distribution](#theoretical-distribution)
A distribution based upon mathematical formulas and
calculations, with a defined shape and specific parameters.
Statistical methods (i.e. goodness of fit tests) are often used
to select [theoretical distribution](#theoretical-distribution)s which best fit the
observed data. See also [empirical distribution](#empirical-distribution).

### [Trace-back](#trace-back)
See [backward trace](#backward-trace).

### [Trace-in](#trace-in)
See [backward trace](#backward-trace).

### [Trace forward](#trace-forward)
See [forward trace](#forward-trace).

### [Trace-out](#trace-out)
See [forward trace](#forward-trace).

### [Tracing](#tracing)
To track or identify the movements of animals, personnel,
vehicles, equipment, etc. (direct and/or [indirect contact](#indirect-contact)s)
to and from an infected [premises](#premises) for the purposes of
detecting the source of infection and to identify potential
disease spread to other [premises](#premises) (13). See also [backward trace](#backward-trace);
[forward trace](#forward-trace).

### [Transmission](#transmission)
A process by which a disease agent is passed from one
individual to another (6). See also [airborne transmission](#airborne-transmission);
direct transmission; [indirect transmission](#indirect-transmission).

### [Triangular distribution](#triangular-distribution)
A [probability density function](#probability-density-function) defined by a minimum, a
maximum, and a mode (most likely value). This
distribution is often used to represent information
collected from subject matter experts and can be used
when information is scarce (15). See also [expert opinion](#expert-opinion);
[probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [Uncertainty](#uncertainty)
Lack of knowledge regarding the biological system. Input
parameters often include a degree of [uncertainty](#uncertainty) due to a
lack of thorough understanding or available data regarding
the processes or events being modelled. [Uncertainty](#uncertainty) in
input parameter values is incorporated into stochastic
models through the use of probabilistic methods (12).

### [Uniform distribution](#uniform-distribution)
A symmetrical [probability density function](#probability-density-function) defined by a
minimum and a maximum. [Uniform distribution](#uniform-distribution)s are
applied when there is an equal probability of values
occurring between the minimum and maximum (15). See
also [probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [Unit](#unit)
_Definition needed_

### [Vaccine immune](#vaccine-immune)
A state in which herds or flocks are immune due to
vaccination (4). See also [immune](#immune); [natural immunity](#natural-immunity).

### [Validation](#validation)
The process of assessing if a model is an acceptable
representation of the biological system it was intended to
emulate, if the model outcome makes biological sense, and
if it mimics real life (11, 13). See also [face validity](#face-validity); [relative validity](#relative-validity).

### [Variability (biological)](#variability-biological)
Differences between individuals (herds/flocks) or within an
individual (herd/flock) under differing circumstances 
(e.g. environmental, climatic, regional, host susceptibility,
agent virulence). Use of [stochastic models](#stochastic-models) is intended to
account for the natural variability intrinsic to the model
parameters through the use of probabilistic methods (12).

### [Verification](#verification)
The process of determining if the mathematics and
programming in a model are working correctly and as
intended (7, 12).

### [Weibull distribution](#weibull-distribution)
A [probability density function](#probability-density-function) defined by shape () and
scale () (where both and are greater than zero) used
to model the time until occurrence of an event where the
probability of occurrence changes over time (15). See also
[probability density function](#probability-density-function).

### [Within-unit prevalence](#within-unit-prevalence)
The average daily prevalence of infectious (subclinically
and clinically infectious) individuals within infected herds,
flocks or pens. See also [clinically infectious](#clinically-infectious); [subclinically infectious](#subclinically-infectious).

### [Zone](#zone)
_Definition needed_

## Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge Barbara Corso, Emery
Leger, Francesca Culver, Graeme Garner, Jane Rooney,
Jonathan Happold, Katie Owen, Neil Harvey, Steve Weber,
and Thomas Rawdon for their comments and helpful
suggestions.